---
bill_number: "C-20"
title: "Build Canada Homes Act"
long_title: "An Act respecting the establishment of Build Canada Homes"
session: "45-1"
stage: "first-reading-house"
introduced: "2026-02-05"
---

# Bill C-20 — Build Canada Homes Act

## Summary

This enactment establishes Build Canada Homes as a Crown corporation. The purpose of Build Canada Homes is to promote, support and develop the supply of affordable housing in Canada and to promote innovative and efficient building techniques in the housing construction sector in Canada. The enactment, among other things,
It also includes transitional provisions, makes a consequential amendment to theand contains coordinating amendments. Financial Administration Act

## Short Title

### Section 1
*Short title*

This Act may be cited as the Build Canada Homes Act .

## Definitions

### Section 2
*Definitions*

The following definitions apply in this Act.

> **appropriate Minister** means the Minister specified as the appropriate Minister in respect of Canada Lands Company Limited for the purposes of Part X of the Financial Administration Act . ( )

> **Board** means the board of directors established by section . ( )

> **Chairperson** means the Chairperson appointed under section . ( )

> **Chief Executive Officer** means the Chief Executive Officer appointed under section . ( )

> **Corporation** means Build Canada Homes, the corporation established by subsection (1). ( )

> **director** means a director appointed under subsection (1). ( )

> **Minister** means the member of the King’s Privy Council for Canada who is designated as the Minister under section . ( )

> **parent Crown corporation** has the same meaning as in subsection 83(1) of the Financial Administration Act . ( )

> **person** includes a trust, a partnership, a joint venture and an association of natural persons or corporations. ( )

> **wholly-owned subsidiary** has the same meaning as in section 83(1) of the Financial Administration Act . ( )

## Designation of Minister

### Section 3
*Designation of Minister*

The Governor in Council may, by order, designate a member of the King’s Privy Council for Canada to be the Minister for the purposes of this Act.

## Purpose

### Section 4
*Purpose*

The purpose of the Corporation is to promote, support and develop the supply of affordable housing in Canada and to promote innovative and efficient building techniques in the housing construction sector in Canada.

## Establishment of Build Canada Homes

### Section 5
*Establishment*

**(1)** A corporation is established to be known as Build Canada Homes.

*Head office*

**(2)** The head office of the Corporation is to be at a place in Canada that is designated by the Governor in Council.

*Capacity*

**(3)** The Corporation has the capacity and, subject to this Act, the rights, powers and privileges of a natural person.

### Section 6
*Agent of His Majesty*

**(1)** The Corporation is an agent of His Majesty.

*Contracts*

**(2)** The Corporation, or any of its wholly-owned subsidiaries that is an agent of His Majesty, may enter into contracts with His Majesty as though it were not an agent of His Majesty.

*Order*

**(3)** Despite subsection (1), the Governor in Council may, by order, declare that the Corporation is not an agent of His Majesty when it is carrying out activities specified in the order.

## Board of Directors and Chief Executive Officer

### Section 7
*Establishment and composition*

The Corporation has a board of directors consisting of a Chairperson and at least eight but not more than 10 other directors.

### Section 8
*Appointment of Chairperson*

The Chairperson is to be appointed by the Governor in Council to hold office during pleasure for any term that the Governor in Council considers appropriate.

### Section 9
*Absence or incapacity — Chairperson*

If the Chairperson is absent or incapacitated or if the office of Chairperson is vacant, the Board may designate one of the other directors to exercise the powers and perform the duties and functions of the Chairperson during the absence, incapacity or vacancy, but that director is not to be designated for a period exceeding 90 days without the approval of the Governor in Council.

### Section 10
*Appointment of directors*

**(1)** Each director of the Board, other than the Chairperson, is to be appointed by the Minister, with the approval of the Governor in Council, to hold office during pleasure for a term not exceeding four years that will ensure, as far as possible, the expiry in any one year of the terms of office of not more than one half of the directors.

*Continuation in office*

**(2)** Despite subsection (1), if a director is not appointed to take office on the expiry of the term of an incumbent director, other than the Chairperson, the incumbent director continues in the office until their successor is appointed.

### Section 11
*Appointment of Chief Executive Officer*

The Chief Executive Officer is to be appointed by the Governor in Council to hold office during pleasure for any term that the Governor in Council considers appropriate.

### Section 12
*Full-time office*

The Chief Executive Officer is to carry out the duties and functions of the office on a full-time basis.

### Section 13
*Incapacity or vacancy — Chief Executive Officer*

If the Chief Executive Officer is absent or incapacitated or if the office of chief executive officer is vacant, the board may designate any individual to exercise the powers and perform the duties and functions of the Chief Executive Officer during the absence, incapacity or vacancy, but that individual is not to be designated for a period exceeding 90 days without the approval of the Governor in Council.

### Section 14
*Attendance at Board meetings*

Subject to the by-laws of the Corporation, the Chief Executive Officer may attend meetings of the Board or any of its committees.

### Section 15
*Consultations*

The Minister must consult the Board with respect to the appointment of any individual as Chairperson or Chief Executive Officer.

### Section 16
*Ineligibility for appointment*

An individual is not eligible to be appointed, or continue in the office, as the Chief Executive Officer, the Chairperson or a director if the individual

### Section 17
*Termination of appointment*

The Governor in Council may terminate the appointment of, or remove or suspend, any director, including the Chairperson, and the Chief Executive Officer.

### Section 18
*Remuneration*

**(1)** The Chairperson, each of the other directors and the Chief Executive Officer are to be paid by the Corporation remuneration for their services in respect of that office.

*Rate of remuneration*

**(2)** The rate of any remuneration paid to the Chairperson, each of the other directors and the Chief Executive Officer is to be fixed by the Governor in Council.

### Section 19
*Committees of Board*

**(1)** The Board may establish any committee of the Board that it considers advisable and may determine the committee’s composition and duties and the tenure of its members.

*Delegation of powers*

**(2)** The Board may delegate powers to any of its committees to act in all matters that are not by this Act or by any by-law of the Corporation or resolution of the Board that are not specifically reserved to the Board.

## Powers

### Section 20
*Powers*

To carry out its purpose, the Corporation may, among other things,

### Section 21
*Loan guarantees — limitation*

Despite paragraph (c), the Corporation may provide a loan guarantee only with the Minister of Finance’s approval.

### Section 22
*Subsidiaries*

The Corporation or any of its wholly-owned subsidiaries may procure the incorporation, dissolution or amalgamation of its subsidiaries, and acquire or dispose of any shares in its subsidiaries, only with the approval of the Minister or under a directive of the Governor in Council under subsection (1).

### Section 23
*Non-application of provision*

Section 91 of the Financial Administration Act does not apply to or in respect of the Corporation or any of its wholly-owned subsidiaries.

### Section 24
*Disposal or lease of property*

Subsection 99(2) of the Financial Administration Act does not apply in respect of any sale or other disposal or lease of property held by the Corporation or any of its wholly-owned subsidiaries that is an agent of His Majesty.

### Section 25
*Non-application of provision*

Subsection 100(1) of the Financial Administration Act does not apply to or in respect of the Corporation or any of its wholly-owned subsidiaries that is an agent of His Majesty.

### Section 26
*Cooperation*

The Corporation may cooperate with any person or entity, including any level of government in Canada, to carry out its purpose, and for that purpose may enter into agreements and participate in any trust, partnership, joint venture or association of natural persons or corporations.

## Financial Provisions

### Section 27
*Capital and shares*

**(1)** The capital of the Corporation is $100, divided into 10 shares having a par value of $10 each. The shares are to be issued to the Minister to be held on behalf of His Majesty.

*Registration*

**(2)** The shares issued to the Minister are to be registered by the Corporation in the name of the Minister.

### Section 28
*Financial year*

The financial year of the Corporation is the period of 12 months beginning on April 1 and ending on the next March 31, unless the Governor in Council directs otherwise.

### Section 29
*Consolidated Revenue Fund — Corporation*

The Minister of Finance may make payments out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund in an aggregate amount not exceeding $11.5 billion, or any other amount that is specified in an appropriation Act or any other Act of Parliament, to fund the operations and activities of the Corporation.

### Section 30
*Borrowing power*

**(1)** At the request of the Corporation, the Minister of Finance may, on the recommendation of the Minister, lend money to the Corporation out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund on any terms and conditions that the Minister of Finance may fix.

*Borrowing — other sources*

**(2)** The Corporation or any of its wholly-owned subsidiaries may, to carry out its purpose, borrow money from any other source, but the aggregate outstanding amount of all loans from such other sources at any time may not exceed $400 million or any other amount that is specified by order of the Governor in Council on the recommendation of the Minister of Finance.

*Loan guarantees*

**(3)** Any loan guarantee provided by the Corporation or any of its wholly-owned subsidiaries is not considered to be a transaction to borrow money for the purposes of subsection (2).

## Miscellaneous

### Section 31
*Regulations*

The Governor in Council may make regulations to carry out the purposes and provisions of this Act, including regulations setting out requirements in respect of the exercise of the Corporation’s powers under this Act.

### Section 32
*Inconsistency*

In the event of any inconsistency between this Act and Part X of the Financial Administration Act , this Act prevails to the extent of the inconsistency.

### Section 33
*Accident compensation*

The directors, including the Chairperson, the Chief Executive Officer and the officers and employees of the Corporation are deemed to be employees for the purposes of the Government Employees Compensation Act and to be employed in the federal public administration for the purposes of any regulations made under section 9 of the Aeronautics Act .

### Section 34
*Review*

**(1)** Five years after the day on which this section comes into force, and every 10 years after that, the Minister must have a review of the provisions and operation of this Act undertaken in consultation with the Minister of Finance.

*Report to Parliament*

**(2)** Within one year after the review is undertaken, the Minister must cause a copy of a report on the review to be laid before each House of Parliament.

*Review of report*

**(3)** The report is to be reviewed by any committee of the Senate or of the House of Commons, or any joint committee, that may be designated or established for the purpose of reviewing the report.

## Transfers and Reorganization

### Section 35
*Transfers*

The Governor in Council may, on the recommendation of the Minister, by order, transfer or direct to be transferred to the Corporation

### Section 36
*Directive*

**(1)** The Governor in Council may — on the recommendation of the Minister in relation to the Corporation or any wholly-owned subsidiary of the Corporation or of the appropriate Minister in relation to Canada Lands Company Limited or any wholly-owned subsidiary of Canada Lands Company Limited — on any terms and conditions that the Governor in Council considers appropriate, issue a directive to the Corporation or to Canada Lands Company Limited or to any wholly-owned subsidiary of the Corporation or of Canada Lands Company Limited to take any measure referred to in any of sections , or .

*Compliance with directive*

**(2)** The directors of the Corporation or of Canada Lands Company Limited or of any wholly-owned subsidiary of the Corporation or of Canada Lands Company Limited must comply with a directive issued under subsection (1). Compliance with the issued directive is deemed to be in the best interests of the Corporation, Canada Lands Company Limited or the wholly-owned subsidiary, as the case may be.

*Notification of implementation*

**(3)** As soon as feasible after implementing a directive and completing any actions that are required to be taken in connection with that implementation, the Corporation, Canada Lands Company Limited or the wholly-owned subsidiary must notify the Minister or the appropriate Minister, as the case may be, that it has done so.

*Non-application of Statutory Instruments Act*

**(4)** The Statutory Instruments Act does not apply to a directive issued under subsection (1).

*No liability*

**(5)** If a directive is issued under subsection (1), no action or other proceeding, including any action or proceeding in restitution or for damages of any kind, that is based on or is in relation to any agreement in relation to the Corporation or Canada Lands Company Limited or any wholly-owned subsidiary of the Corporation or of Canada Lands Company Limited that existed on or before the directive is issued lies or may be instituted by anyone against His Majesty or any minister or any employee or agent of His Majesty, or any person engaged to provide advice or services to His Majesty in relation to such an agreement, for anything done or omitted to be done or for anything purported to have been done or omitted to be done under the directive, in the exercise of their powers or the performance of their duties or functions.

### Section 37
*Authority — Corporation*

If directed by the Governor in Council under subsection (1), the Corporation may take any of the following measures:

### Section 38
*Amendments to articles*

The appropriate Minister may apply for articles that would add to or otherwise make a material change in the objects or purposes for which Canada Lands Company Limited is incorporated, or the restrictions on the businesses or activities that it may carry on, as set out in its articles.

### Section 39
*Authority — Canada Lands Company Limited*

If directed by the Governor in Council under subsection (1), Canada Lands Company Limited may take any of the following measures:

### Section 40
*Authority — subsidiaries*

If it is issued a directive by the Governor in Council under subsection (1), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Corporation or Canada Lands Company Limited may take any of the following measures:

### Section 41
*Consolidated Revenue Fund — Canada Lands Company Limited*

**(1)** The appropriate Minister may make payments out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund to make a contribution of capital to Canada Lands Company Limited or to acquire shares in Canada Lands Company Limited on behalf of His Majesty.

*Consolidated Revenue Fund — entity*

**(2)** The Minister of Finance may make payments out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund to fund the operations and activities of any entity designated by the Governor in Council if the Governor in Council is of the opinion that the entity is performing any activity related to carrying out the purpose of the Corporation.

*Limit*

**(3)** The aggregate amount of payments made under subsections (1) and (2) may not exceed $1.515 billion, or any other amount that is specified in an appropriation Act or any other Act of Parliament.

*Contracts*

**(4)** For the purposes of subsection (1), Canada Lands Company Limited may enter into contracts with His Majesty as though it were not an agent of His Majesty.

*Repeal*

**(5)** This section is repealed on a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council.

### Section 42
*Non-application of provisions*

Sections 89, 90 and 91 and subsection 99(2) of the Financial Administration Act do not apply to any measure referred to in sections to .

### Section 43
*Part X of Financial Administration Act*

The Governor in Council may, by order, declare that any of the provisions of Part X of the Financial Administration Act do not apply to measures taken by the Corporation or any of its wholly-owned subsidiaries or Canada Lands Company Limited or any of its wholly-owned subsidiaries under a directive made under subsection (1).

## Transitional Provisions

### Section 44
*Definition of*

For the purposes of this section and sections to , **special operating agency** means the special operating agency known as Build Canada Homes created by a decision of the Treasury Board.

### Section 45
*Transfer*

The Governor in Council may, by order, require that

### Section 46
*Chairperson*

**(1)** Section does not apply to the first appointment under section .

*Initial powers*

**(2)** Until the first day on which the Board consists of a Chairperson and at least eight other directors, the Chairperson has all the powers of the Board.

### Section 47
*Chief Executive Officer*

The person who holds the office of Chief Executive Officer of the special operating agency immediately before the day on which this section comes into force continues in the office as the Chief Executive Officer of the Corporation for the remainder of the term for which the person was appointed Chief Executive Officer of the special operating agency.

### Section 48
*Regulations*

The Governor in Council may make regulations respecting the transfer of the special operating agency to the Corporation, including regulations respecting the manner in which rights, property, obligations and liabilities are to be transferred under paragraphs (a) and (b) and any restrictions on those transfers.

## Consequential Amendment to the Financial Administration Act

### Section 49

Part I of Schedule III to the Financial Administration Act is amended by adding the following in alphabetical order:

## Coordinating Amendments

### Section 50
*Bill C-15*

**(1)** Subsections (2) to (7) apply if Bill C-15, introduced in the 1st session of the 45th Parliament and entitled Budget 2025 Implementation Act, No. 1 (in this section referred to as the “other Act”), receives royal assent.

**(2)** If section 200 of the other Act comes into force before section of this Act, then on the day on which that section comes into force, that section 200 is repealed and section of this Act is replaced by the following:

**(3)** If section of this Act comes into force before section 200 of the other Act, then that section 200 is repealed.

**(4)** If section 200 of the other Act comes into force on the same day as section of this Act, then that section 200 is deemed never to have come into force and is repealed.

**(5)** If section 201 of the other Act comes into force before section of this Act, then on the day on which that section comes into force, that section 201 is repealed and section of this Act is replaced by the following:

**(6)** If section of this Act comes into force before section 201 of the other Act, then that section 201 is repealed.

**(7)** If section 201 of the other Act comes into force on the same day as section of this Act, then that section 201 is deemed never to have come into force and is repealed.

## Coming into Force

### Section 51
*Order in council*

The provisions of this Act, except for section , come into force on a day or days to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council.
