---
bill_number: "C-27"
title: "Final Self-Government Agreement for theAct"
long_title: "An Act to give effect to the Final Self-Government Agreement for theand to make consequential amendments to other Acts"
session: "45-1"
stage: "first-reading-house"
introduced: "2026-03-26"
---

# Bill C-27 — Final Self-Government Agreement for theAct

## Summary

This enactment gives effect to the Final Self-Government Agreement for theand makes consequential amendments to other Acts.

## Short Title

### Section 1
*Short title*

This Act may be cited as the Final Self-Government Agreement for the Act .

## Interpretation

### Section 2
*Definitions*

The following definitions apply in this Act.

> **Sahtu Agreement** has the meaning assigned by the definition in section 2 of the Sahtu Dene and Metis Land Claim Settlement Act . ( )

> **Effective Date** means the date on which Parts I, II and IV of the Agreement take effect in accordance with 7.10 of that Agreement. ( )

> **** has the same meaning as in 1.1 of the Agreement. ( )

> **Agreement** means the Final Self-Government Agreement for the among The Tlegohli Got’ine Government Incorporated and the Governments of Canada and the Northwest Territories, signed on September 18, 2025, including any amendments made to it. ( )

> **Government** has the same meaning as in 1.1 of the Agreement. ( )

> **The Tlegohli Got’ine Government Incorporated** has the same meaning as in 1.1 of the Agreement. ( )

> **law** has the meaning assigned by the definition in 1.1 of the Agreement. ( )

> **Tax Treatment Agreement** means the tax treatment agreement entered into under 8.13.1 of the Agreement, including any amendments made to it. ( )

> **Transition Date** means the date on which Part II of the Agreement is no longer in effect and Part III of that Agreement takes effect in accordance with 6.6.1 and 7.10.4 of that Agreement. ( )

### Section 3
*Status of Agreement*

The Agreement is a treaty within the meaning of sections 25 and 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982 .

## Agreement

### Section 4
*Agreement given effect*

**(1)** The Agreement is approved, given effect and declared valid and has the force of law.

*Rights and duties*

**(2)** For greater certainty, a person or entity has the powers, rights, privileges and benefits conferred on the person or entity by the Agreement and must perform the duties, and is subject to the liabilities, imposed on the person or entity by the Agreement.

*Agreement binding*

**(3)** For greater certainty, the Agreement is binding on, and may be relied on by, all persons and entities.

### Section 5
*Agreement prevails*

**(1)** Subject to section , in the event of an inconsistency or conflict between the Agreement and this Act or any other federal law, the Agreement prevails to the extent of the inconsistency or conflict.

*Act prevails*

**(2)** Subject to section , in the event of an inconsistency or conflict between this Act and any other federal law, this Act prevails to the extent of the inconsistency or conflict.

### Section 6
*Exception*

In the event of an inconsistency or conflict between the Sahtu Dene and Metis Land Claim Settlement Act or the Sahtu Agreement and the Agreement, this Act or any law, the Sahtu Dene and Metis Land Claim Settlement Act or the Sahtu Agreement prevails to the extent of the inconsistency or conflict.

## Government

### Section 7
*Capacity of natural person*

The Government is a legal entity and has the capacity, rights, powers and privileges of a natural person.

### Section 8
*Force of law*

Any law that is made in accordance with the Agreement has the force of law.

## Application of Other Acts

### Section 9
*Indian Act*

Subject to 2.9 of the Agreement, the Indian Act does not apply to the Government or any , within the meaning of 1.1 of the Agreement, as of the day on which section comes into force.

### Section 10
*Statutory Instruments Act*

A law is not a statutory instrument for the purposes of the Statutory Instruments Act .

## Taxation

### Section 11
*Tax Treatment Agreement*

The Tax Treatment Agreement is approved, given effect and declared valid and has the force of law during the period that it is in effect.

### Section 12
*Clarification*

The Tax Treatment Agreement does not form part of the Agreement, and it is not a treaty or a land claims agreement within the meaning of sections 25 and 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982 .

## General

### Section 13
*Judicial notice — Agreements*

**(1)** Judicial notice must be taken of the Agreement and the Tax Treatment Agreement.

*Publication*

**(2)** The Agreement and the Tax Treatment Agreement must be published by the King’s Printer.

*Evidence*

**(3)** A copy of the Agreement or the Tax Treatment Agreement published by the King’s Printer is evidence of that agreement and of its contents, and a copy purporting to be published by the King’s Printer is presumed to be so published unless the contrary is shown.

### Section 14
*Judicial notice — law*

**(1)** Judicial notice must be taken of any law that is registered in the public register referred to in 8.9 or 30.9 of the Agreement.

*Evidence*

**(2)** A copy of any law purporting to be deposited in the public register referred to in 8.9 or 30.9 of the Agreement is evidence of that law and of its contents, unless the contrary is shown.

### Section 15
*Federal Courts Act*

**(1)** The Government and its institutions are not as defined in subsection 2(1) of the Federal Courts Act .

*Jurisdiction — Supreme Court of Northwest Territories*

**(2)** The Supreme Court of the Northwest Territories has exclusive original jurisdiction to hear and determine applications for judicial review of the decisions of the Government or its institutions, provided that all appeal and review mechanisms set out in law have been exhausted.

*Definition of*

**(3)** In this section, **institutions** has the meaning assigned by the definition in 1.1 of the Agreement.

### Section 16
*Notice of issues arising*

**(1)** If an issue arises in any judicial or administrative proceeding in respect of the interpretation, validity or applicability of the Agreement, of this Act, of the Act of the legislature of the Northwest Territories that gives effect to the Agreement or of any law, then the issue must not be decided until the party raising it has served notice on the Attorney General of Canada, the Attorney General of the Northwest Territories and the Government.

*Content and timing*

**(2)** The notice must describe the proceeding, state the issue and the day on which it is to be argued, give the particulars that are necessary to show the point to be argued and, unless the court or tribunal authorizes a shorter period, be served at least 14 days before the day on which the issue is to be argued.

*Participation in proceeding*

**(3)** The Attorney General of Canada, the Attorney General of the Northwest Territories and the Government may appear and participate in the proceeding as parties with the same rights as any other party.

*Clarification*

**(4)** For greater certainty, subsections (2) and (3) do not require that an oral hearing be held if one is not otherwise required.

### Section 17
*Retroactive effect*

Despite subsection 4(1), 2.7 and chapter 7 of the Agreement are deemed to have effect as of November 20, 2024.

### Section 18
*Orders and regulations*

The Governor in Council may make any orders and regulations that the Governor in Council considers necessary for the purpose of carrying out the Agreement — including to set the Effective Date and Transition Date — or of any other agreement that is related to its implementation.

## Consequential Amendments

### Access to Information Act

### Section 19

Subsection 13(3) of the Access to Information Act is amended by adding the following after paragraph (c):

### Payments in Lieu of Taxes Act

### Section 20

The definition in subsection 2(1) of the Payments in Lieu of Taxes Act is amended by adding the following after paragraph (g.1):

### Privacy Act

### Section 21

Subsection 8(7) of the Privacy Act is amended by adding the following after paragraph (c):

### Section 22

Subsection 19(1) of the Act is amended by striking out “or” at the end of paragraph (f), by adding “or” at the end of paragraph (g) and by adding the following after paragraph (g):

### Mackenzie Valley Resource Management Act

### Section 23

**(1)** The definition in section 2 of the Mackenzie Valley Resource Management Act is replaced by the following:

**(2)** The definition in section 2 of the Act is replaced by the following:

**(3)** Section 2 of the Act is amended by adding the following in alphabetical order:

### Section 24

Section 4 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (5):

### Section 25

Subsection 5(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 26

Subsection 8(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 27

Subsection 16(2) of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 28

Section 22 of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 29

Subsection 31(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 30

Section 63 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (5):

### Section 31

**(1)** Section 83 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (1.1):

**(2)** Section 83 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (2.1):

**(3)** Subsection 83(5) of the Act is replaced by the following:

**(4)** Subsection 83(6) of the English version of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 32

Subsection 85(4) of the Act is amended by striking out “or” at the end of paragraph (b), by adding “or” at the end of paragraph (c) and by adding the following after paragraph (c):

### Section 33

The Act is amended by adding the following after section 90.11:

### Section 34

The Act is amended by adding the following after section 90.21:

### Section 35

Section 95 of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 36

Subsection 106.1(2) of the Act is amended by striking out “and” at the end of paragraph (d), by adding “and” at the end of paragraph (e) and by adding the following after paragraph (e):

### Section 37

The Act is amended by adding the following after section 109.11:

### Section 38

Section 109.2 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (4):

### Section 39

Section 118 of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 40

Section 121 of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 41

Subsection 123.2(2) of the Act is replaced by the following:

### First Nations Goods and Services Tax Act

### Section 42

Schedule 1 to the First Nations Goods and Services Tax Act is amended by adding the following in alphabetical order:

## Coordinating Amendment

### Section 43
*Bill C-10*

If Bill C-10, introduced in the 1st session of the 45th Parliament and entitled the Commissioner for Modern Treaty Implementation Act , receives royal assent, then, on the first day on which both that Act and section of this Act are in force, the schedule to that Act is amended by adding the following in alphabetical order:

## Coming into Force

### Section 44
*Order in council*

**(1)** Sections to , , , and , subsections (2) and (3) and sections to and to come into force on a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council.

*Order in council*

**(2)** Section , subsection (1) and section come into force on a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council, but that day must not be before the day referred to in subsection (1).
