---
bill_number: "C-30"
title: "Spring Economic Update 2026 Implementation Act"
long_title: "An Act to implement certain provisions of the spring economic update tabled in Parliament on April 28, 2026"
session: "45-1"
stage: "first-reading-house"
introduced: "2026-04-29"
---

# Bill C-30 — Spring Economic Update 2026 Implementation Act

## Summary

Part 1 implements certain measures in respect of theand theby
Part 2 amends theto temporarily set the excise tax rate on gasoline and aviation gasoline to $0.00 and on diesel fuel and aviation fuel to $0.00 for the period beginning on April 20, 2026 and ending on September 7, 2026. It also amends theand theto implement an additional two-year extension of the 2% cap on the annual alcohol excise duty inflation adjustment, and of the 50% reduction on excise duty rates for the first 15,000 hectolitres of beer brewed in Canada, effective April 1, 2026.
Part 3 amends several Acts in order to implement various measures.
Division 1 of Part 3 amends theto provide that thedoes not apply in respect of certain transactions made by foreign banks or entities associated with a foreign bank if the transactions are subject to an approval under the, theor the.
Division 2 of Part 3 amends theto combine into a single Act the Bank of Canada’s powers, duties and functions related to the recovery of costs incurred by it for or in connection with the administration of certain Acts. It also makes related amendments to other Acts. Bank of Canada Act
Division 3 of Part 3 amends theto provide immunity for the Canadian Payment Association and certain individuals from any civil liability, other than in contract, for anything done or omitted to be done in good faith in the administration or discharge of any powers or duties conferred under that Act. Canadian Payments Act
Division 4 of Part 3 amends theto, among other things, Employment Insurance Act
Division 5 of Part 3 amends theto reduce the contribution rate for employees, employers and self-employed persons for the year 2027 and each subsequent year. Canada Pension Plan
Division 6 of Part 3 amends theto require certain individuals and entities to provide the Minister of Transport with information that that Minister considers necessary for the exercise of the powers and the performance of the duties and functions of that Minister or for the development of transportation policies. The Division also amends that Act to specify the individuals and entities to whom such information may be communicated. Canada Transportation Act
Division 7 of Part 3 amends theto clarify the mandate of the Canadian Food Inspection Agency and authorize the Governor in Council to, in certain circumstances, exempt persons, things or activities, or classes of persons, things or activities, from the application of provisions of certain Acts of Parliament, or regulations made under those Acts, that are administered or enforced by the Agency. It also makes a consequential amendment to the.
Division 8 of Part 3 amends theto, among other things, Pest Control Products Act

## Short Title

### Section 1
*Short title*

This Act may be cited as the Spring Economic Update 2026 Implementation Act .

## PART 1 — Amendments to the Income Tax Act and the Income Tax Regulations

### Income Tax Act

### Section 2

**(1)** Subparagraph 8(1)(t)(i) of the Income Tax Act is replaced by the following:

**(2)** Subparagraph 8(14)(c)(v) of the Act is replaced by the following:

**(3)** Subsections (1) and (2) apply to the 2026 and subsequent taxation years.

### Section 3

The portion of subsection 110.61(1) of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:

### Section 4

The portion of subsection 110.62(1) of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:

### Section 5

Subsection 117.1(2) of the Act is amended by adding the following after paragraph (b):

### Section 6

**(1)** The portion of subsection 146.01(4.1) of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:

**(2)** Paragraphs 146.01(4.2)(e) and (f) of the Act are replaced by the following:

### Income Tax Regulations

### Section 7

**(1)** Subsection 1100(1) of the Income Tax Regulations is amended by adding “and” at the end of paragraph (zd) and by replacing the heading before paragraph (ze) and paragraphs (ze) to (zh) with the following:

**(2)** Section 1100 of the Regulations is amended by adding the following after subsection (1):

**(3)** The portion of paragraph (a) of the description of A.1 in subsection 1100(2) of the Regulations before subparagraph (i) is replaced by the following:

**(4)** Subsection 1100(3) of the Regulations is replaced by the following:

**(5)** Subsections (1) to (4) are deemed to have come into force on November 4, 2025.

### Section 8

**(1)** Section 1101 of the Regulations is amended by adding the following after subsection (5v):

**(2)** Subsection (1) is deemed to have come into force on November 4, 2025.

### Section 9

**(1)** The portion of subsection 1102(20.1) of the Regulations before paragraph (b) is replaced by the following:

**(2)** Paragraph 1102(26)(b) of the Regulations is replaced by the following:

**(3)** Section 1102 of the Regulations is amended by adding the following after subsection (26):

**(4)** Subsections (1) and (3) are deemed to have come into force on November 4, 2025.

**(5)** Subsection (2) is deemed to have come into force on February 16, 2026.

### Section 10

**(1)** Subsection 1104(2) of the Regulations is amended by adding the following in alphabetical order:

**(2)** Subsection (1) is deemed to have come into force on November 4, 2025.

## PART 2 — Amendments Relating to the Fuel Excise Tax Relief and the Alcohol Excise Duty Relief

### Excise Tax Act

### Section 11

**(1)** Schedule I to the Excise Tax Act is amended by adding the following after section 9.1:

**(2)** Subsection (1) is deemed to have come into force on April 20, 2026.

### Excise Act

### Section 12

**(1)** Section 170.2 of the Excise Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (2.3):

**(2)** Subsection (1) is deemed to have come into force on April 1, 2026.

### Section 13

**(1)** Paragraphs 1(a) to (c) of Part II.1 of the schedule to the Act are amended by replacing “10%” with “5%”.

**(2)** Paragraphs 1(a) to (c) of Part II.1 of the schedule to the Act, as amended by subsection (1), are amended by replacing “5%” with “10%”.

**(3)** Subsection (1) is deemed to have come into force on April 1, 2026.

**(4)** Subsection (2) comes into force on April 1, 2028.

### Section 14

**(1)** Paragraphs 2(a) to (c) of Part II.1 of the schedule to the Act are amended by replacing “20%” with “10%”.

**(2)** Paragraphs 2(a) to (c) of Part II.1 of the schedule to the Act, as amended by subsection (1), are amended by replacing “10%” with “20%”.

**(3)** Subsection (1) is deemed to have come into force on April 1, 2026.

**(4)** Subsection (2) comes into force on April 1, 2028.

### Section 15

**(1)** Paragraphs 3(a) to (c) of Part II.1 of the schedule to the Act are amended by replacing “40%” with “20%”.

**(2)** Paragraphs 3(a) to (c) of Part II.1 of the schedule to the Act, as amended by subsection (1), are amended by replacing “20%” with “40%”.

**(3)** Subsection (1) is deemed to have come into force on April 1, 2026.

**(4)** Subsection (2) comes into force on April 1, 2028.

### Excise Act, 2001

### Section 16

**(1)** Section 123.1 of the Excise Act, 2001 is amended by adding the following after subsection (2.3):

**(2)** Subsection (1) is deemed to have come into force on April 1, 2026.

### Section 17

**(1)** Section 135.1 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (2.3):

**(2)** Subsection (1) is deemed to have come into force on April 1, 2026.

## PART 3 — Various Measures

### DIVISION 1 — Bank Act

#### Amendments to the Act

### Section 18

**(1)** Subsection 522.34(1) of the Bank Act is replaced by the following:

**(2)** Subsection 522.34(2) of the Act is amended by adding the following in alphabetical order:

#### Coming into Force

### Section 19
*120th day after royal assent*

This Division comes into force on the 120th day after the day on which this Act receives royal assent.

### DIVISION 2 — Bank of Canada Act

#### Amendments to the Act

### Section 20

**(1)** Section 2 of the Bank of Canada Act is amended by adding the following in alphabetical order:

**(2)** Section 2 of the Act is amended by adding the following in alphabetical order:

**(3)** The definition **entity subject to assessment fees** in section 2 of the Act is amended by adding, in alphabetical order, a reference to “accredited third-party service provider” in the list of entities.

**(4)** Section 2 of the Act is amended by adding the following in alphabetical order:

**(5)** The definition **entity subject to assessment fees** in section 2 of the Act is amended by adding, in alphabetical order, a reference to “clearing house” in the list of entities.

**(6)** Section 2 of the Act is amended by adding the following in alphabetical order:

**(7)** The definition **entity subject to assessment fees** in section 2 of the Act is amended by adding, in alphabetical order, a reference to “external complaints body” in the list of entities.

**(8)** Section 2 of the Act is amended by adding the following in alphabetical order:

**(9)** The definition **entity subject to assessment fees** in section 2 of the Act is amended by adding, in alphabetical order, a reference to “issuer” in the list of entities.

**(10)** Section 2 of the Act is amended by adding the following in alphabetical order:

**(11)** The definition **entity subject to assessment fees** in section 2 of the Act is amended by adding, in alphabetical order, a reference to “participating entity” in the list of entities.

### Section 21

The Act is amended by adding the following after section 30.1:

#### Related Amendments

#### Payment Clearing and Settlement Act

### Section 22

Section 12.1 of the Payment Clearing and Settlement Act is repealed.

#### Retail Payment Activities Act

### Section 23

**(1)** The portion of subsection 11(1) of the Retail Payment Activities Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:

**(2)** Paragraphs 11(1)(d) and (e) of the Act are replaced by the following:

### Section 24

Part 6 of the Act is repealed.

### Section 25

Paragraph 101(1)(h) of the Act is replaced by the following:

#### Consumer-Driven Banking Act

### Section 26

Subsection 23(1) of the Consumer-Driven Banking Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 27

Section 25 of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 28

Subsection 36(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 29

Section 38 of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 30

The heading before section 140 and sections 140 and 141 of the Act are repealed.

### Section 31

Paragraph 155(1)(a) of the Act is replaced by the following:

#### Stablecoin Act

### Section 32

The heading before section 53 and sections 53 and 54 of the Stablecoin Act are repealed.

### Section 33

Section 64 of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 34

Section 79 of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 35

**(1)** Paragraph 93(y) of the Act is repealed.

**(2)** Paragraph 93(z.2) of the Act is replaced by the following:

#### Coming into Force

### Section 36
*Order in council*

**(1)** Subject to subsections (2) to (6), the provisions of this Division come into force on a day or days to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council.

*Order in council*

**(2)** Subsections (2) and (3) come into force on a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council, but that day must not be before the day on which subsection (1) comes into force.

*Order in council*

**(3)** Subsections (4) and (5) come into force on a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council, but that day must not be before the day on which subsection (1) comes into force.

*Order in council*

**(4)** Subsections (6) and (7) come into force on a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council, but that day must not be before the day on which subsection (1) comes into force.

*Order in council*

**(5)** Subsections (8) and (9) come into force on a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council, but that day must not be before the day on which subsection (1) comes into force.

*Order in council*

**(6)** Subsections (10) and (11) come into force on a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council, but that day must not be before the day on which subsection (1) comes into force.

### DIVISION 3 — Canadian Payments Act

### Section 37

The Canadian Payments Act is amended by adding the following after section 44:

### DIVISION 4 — Employment Insurance Act

#### Amendments to the Act

### Section 38

**(1)** The portion of paragraph 12(2.3)(a) of the French version of the Employment Insurance Act before subparagraph (i) is replaced by the following:

**(2)** Subparagraph 12(2.3)(a)(i) of the Act is replaced by the following:

**(3)** Subparagraph 12(2.3)(a)(ii) of the Act is replaced by the following:

**(4)** Subsection 12(2.3) of the Act is amended by striking out “or” at the end of paragraph (a) and by repealing paragraph (b).

### Section 39

Schedule VI to the Act is repealed.

#### Coming into Force

### Section 40
*November 7, 2027*

**(1)** Subsections (1) and (4) come into force on November 7, 2027.

*Order in council*

**(2)** Subsection (3) and section come into force on a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council.

### DIVISION 5 — Canada Pension Plan

#### Amendments to the Act

### Section 41

Subsections 113.1(11.07) to (11.09) of the Canada Pension Plan are replaced by the following:

### Section 42

Schedule 1 to the Act is amended by replacing “2003 and each subsequent year” in the column under the heading “Year” with “2003 to 2026”.

### Section 43

Schedule 1 to the Act is amended by adding the following at the end of that Schedule:

#### Coming into Force

### Section 44
*Non-application — subsection 114(2) of Canada Pension Plan*

**(1)** Subsection 114(2) of the Canada Pension Plan does not apply in respect of the amendments to that Act contained in this Division.

*Order in council*

**(2)** This Division comes into force, in accordance with subsection 114(4) of the Canada Pension Plan , on a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council.

### DIVISION 6 — Canada Transportation Act

### Section 45

The Canada Transportation Act is amended by adding the following after section 50.1:

### Section 46

Subsection 51(2) of the Act is amended by adding the following after paragraph (a.1):

### DIVISION 7 — Canadian Food Inspection Agency Act

#### Amendments to the Act

### Section 47

The heading before section 11 of the English version of the Canadian Food Inspection Agency Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 48

Subsections 11(4) and (5) of the Act are replaced by the following:

### Section 49

The Act is amended by adding the following after section 11:

### Section 50

The Act is amended by adding the following after section 31:

#### Consequential Amendment to the Agriculture and Agri-Food Administrative Monetary Penalties Act

### Section 51

Paragraph (b) of the definition in section 2 of the Agriculture and Agri-Food Administrative Monetary Penalties Act is replaced by the following:

### DIVISION 8 — Pest Control Products Act

### Section 52

Paragraph (b) of the definition in subsection 2(1) of the Pest Control Products Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 53

Section 4 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (2):

### Section 54

The Act is amended by adding the following after section 8:

### Section 55

Section 17 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (1):

### Section 56

The portion of subsection 21(5) of the Act before paragraph (b) is replaced by the following:

### Section 57

The Act is amended by adding the following after section 28:

### Section 58

Subsection 42(2) of the Act is amended by adding the following after paragraph (i):

### Section 59

**(1)** Subsection 67(1) of the Act is amended by adding the following after paragraph (b):

**(2)** Subsection 67(1) of the Act is amended by adding the following after paragraph (f):

### Section 60

The portion of section 69 of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:
