---
bill_number: "S-3"
title: "An Act to amend the Weights and Measures Act, the Electricity and Gas Inspection Act, the Weights and Measures Regulations and the Electricity and Gas Inspection Regulations"
long_title: "An Act to amend the Weights and Measures Act, the Electricity and Gas Inspection Act, the Weights and Measures Regulations and the Electricity and GasRegulations Inspection"
session: "45-1"
stage: "first-reading-senate"
introduced: "2025-10-28"
---

# Bill S-3 — An Act to amend the Weights and Measures Act, the Electricity and Gas Inspection Act, the Weights and Measures Regulations and the Electricity and Gas Inspection Regulations

## Summary

This enactment amends theto, among other things, clarify existing powers, duties and functions of the Minister of Industry and inspectors, provide the Minister with certain powers, including with respect to sampling when devices are examined and with respect to corrective and preventive measures, and provide inspectors with certain powers. Weights and Measures Act
It also amends theto, among other things, broaden the definition of “meter”, provide the president with the authority to grant certain exemptions, clarify the steps required to put a device into service, clarify existing powers, duties and functions of the Minister and inspectors, provide the Minister with certain powers, including with respect to sampling when meters are examined and with respect to corrective and preventive measures, and provide inspectors with certain powers. Electricity and Gas Inspection Act
It also repeals certain provisions in theand the. Finally, it includes transitional provisions.

## Weights and Measures Act

### Section 1

**(1)** The definition **inspector** in section 2 of the Weights and Measures Act is replaced by the following:

**(2)** Paragraph (b) of the definition **reference standard** in section 2 of the Act is replaced by the following:

**(3)** Section 2 of the Act is amended by adding the following in alphabetical order:

### Section 2

The heading before section 3 of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 3

The Act is amended by adding the following after section 3:

### Section 4

The portion of section 8 of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:

### Section 5

The Act is amended by adding the following after section 8:

### Section 6

**(1)** Paragraph 10(1)(k) of the Act is replaced by the following:

**(2)** Paragraphs 10(1)(q) to (s) of the Act are replaced by the following:

**(3)** Paragraph 10(1)(t) of the Act is repealed.

**(4)** Subsections 10(2) and (3) of the Act are repealed.

### Section 7

The Act is amended by adding the following after section 10.1:

### Section 8

Subsection 12(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 9

Section 13 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (2):

### Section 10

The Act is amended by adding the following after section 15.1:

### Section 11

Subsections 16.1(1.1) and (2) of the Act are replaced by the following:

### Section 12

**(1)** Subsection 17(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:

**(2)** Subsection 17(3) of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 13

**(1)** Paragraph 17.1(2)(b) of the Act is replaced by the following:

**(2)** Section 17.1 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (2):

### Section 14

Section 18 of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 15

Subsection 19(3) of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 16

Section 20 of the Act and the heading before it are replaced by the following:

### Section 17

Section 21 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (2):

### Section 18

Subsection 26(2) of the Act is repealed.

### Section 19

Section 28 of the Act is repealed.

### Section 20

Subsection 31(3) of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 21

**(1)** The portion of section 32 of the French version of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:

**(2)** Paragraphs 32(a) and (b) of the Act are replaced by the following:

### Section 22

The Act is amended by adding the following after section 34:

### Section 23

Section 36 of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 24

Subsection 37(1) of the French version of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 25

Subsection 39(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 26

Subsection 41(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 27

The Act is amended by adding the following after section 41:

## Electricity and Gas Inspection Act

### Section 28

**(1)** The definitions **accredited meter verifier** and **director** in subsection 2(1) of the Electricity and Gas Inspection Act are repealed.

**(2)** The definitions **apparatus** , **inspector** and **meter** in subsection 2(1) of the Act are replaced by the following:

**(3)** Subsection 2(1) of the Act is amended by adding the following in alphabetical order:

### Section 29

Section 4 of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 30

**(1)** The portion of section 5 of the Act before paragraph (a) is replaced by the following:

**(2)** Paragraph 5(a) of the French version of the Act is replaced by the following:

**(3)** Section 5 of the Act is amended by replacing paragraph (b) and the portion after paragraph (b) with the following:

### Section 31

The heading before section 6 of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 32

Subsection 6(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 33

The Act is amended by adding the following after section 6:

### Section 34

Sections 8 to 10 of the Act are replaced by the following:

### Section 35

Sections 11 to 14 of the Act are replaced by the following:

### Section 36

Subsection 15(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 37

Subsection 16(1) of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 38

Sections 17 and 18 of the Act are replaced by the following:

### Section 39

Sections 20 and 21 of the Act are replaced by the following:

### Section 40

Subsections 23(3) and (4) of the Act are replaced by the following:

### Section 41

Subsection 24(5) of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 42

The heading before section 25 and sections 25 to 27 of the Act are replaced by the following:

### Section 43

**(1)** Paragraph 28(1)(d) of the Act is repealed.

**(2)** Paragraphs 28(1)(e) to (g) of the Act are replaced by the following:

**(3)** Paragraph 28(1)(j) of the Act is replaced by the following:

**(4)** Paragraph 28(1)(p) of the Act is replaced by the following:

**(5)** Subsections 28(2) and (3) of the Act are repealed.

### Section 44

Section 29 of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 45

**(1)** Paragraph 33(1)(c) of the Act is replaced by the following:

**(2)** Paragraph 33(1)(f) of the Act is replaced by the following:

**(3)** Paragraph 33(1)(h) of the Act is replaced by the following:

**(4)** Paragraph 33(1)(j) of the Act is replaced by the following:

### Section 46

**(1)** Paragraph 39(1)(b) of the Act is replaced by the following:

**(2)** Subsection 39(3) of the Act is repealed.

### Section 47

Subsection 46(2) of the Act is repealed.

### Section 48

The Act is amended by replacing “director” with “president” in the following provisions:

## Weights and Measures Regulations

### Section 49

Part IV of the Weights and Measures Regulations is repealed.

### Section 50

Schedule V to the Regulations is repealed.

## Electricity and Gas Inspection Regulations

### Section 51

Part X of the Electricity and Gas Inspection Regulations is repealed.

### Section 52

Schedule 1 to the Regulations is repealed.

## Transitional Provisions

### Section 53
*Definitions*

The following definitions apply in this section and sections to .

> **accredited meter verifier** has the same meaning as in subsection 2(1) of the former Act. ( )

> **authorized service provider** has the same meaning as in subsection 2(1) of the new Act. ( )

> **commencement day** means the day on which this section comes into force. ( )

> **designated inspector** has the same meaning as in subsection 2(1) of the new Act. ( )

> **director** has the same meaning as in subsection 2(1) of the former Act. ( )

> **former Act** means the Electricity and Gas Inspection Act as it read immediately before the commencement day. ( )

> **new Act** means the Electricity and Gas Inspection Act as it reads on the commencement day. ( )

> **president** has the same meaning as in subsection 2(1) of the new Act. ( )

### Section 54
*Verification and sealing*

**(1)** Any verification or sealing completed under subsection 9(1) of the former Act that is still valid on the commencement day is deemed to have been completed under paragraph 9(1)(b) of the new Act.

*Permissions*

**(2)** Any permission granted under subsection 9(2) of the former Act that is still valid on the commencement day is deemed to have been granted under subsection 9(2) of the new Act.

*Approvals — subsection 9(3) of former Act*

**(3)** Any approval granted under subsection 9(3) of the former Act that is still valid on the commencement day is deemed to be a permission granted under subsection 9(3) of the new Act.

*Approvals — subsection 9(4) of former Act*

**(4)** Any approval granted under subsection 9(4) of the former Act that is still valid on the commencement day is deemed to be an approval granted under paragraph 9(1)(a) of the new Act.

### Section 55
*Resealing and marks*

Any resealing completed or mark made under subsection 12(1) of the former Act that is still valid on the commencement day is deemed to have been completed or made under subsection 12(1.1) of the new Act.

### Section 56
*Authorized service providers*

**(1)** Nothing in this Act is to be construed as affecting the status of any person who, immediately before the commencement day, is an accredited meter verifier, except that, as of that day, the person is an authorized service provider.

*Deeming — actions of authorized service providers*

**(2)** Everything done or purported to have been done under the former Act by an accredited meter verifier before the commencement day is deemed, as of that day, to have been done by an authorized service provider under the new Act.

### Section 57
*President*

**(1)** Nothing in this Act is to be construed as affecting the status of the person who, immediately before the commencement day, occupies the position of director, except that, as of that day, the person occupies the position of president.

*Deeming — actions of president*

**(2)** Everything done or purported to have been done under the former Act by the director before the commencement day is deemed, as of that day, to have been done by the president under the new Act.

### Section 58
*Designated inspectors*

**(1)** Nothing in this Act is to be construed as affecting the status of any person who, immediately before the commencement day, is a person designated under subsection 26(3) of the former Act, except that, as of that day, the person is a designated inspector.

*Deeming — actions of designated inspectors*

**(2)** Everything done or purported to have been done by a person designated under subsection 26(3) of the former Act before the commencement day is deemed, as of that day, to have been done by a designated inspector under the new Act.

## Coming into Force

### Section 59
*Order in council*

**(1)** Sections to , subsections (1), (3) and (4), sections to and to , subsections (1) and (3) to (5) and sections to and to come into force on a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council.

*Order in council*

**(2)** Sections to come into force on a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council, but that day must not be before the day referred to in subsection (1).

*Order in council*

**(3)** Subsection (2) and sections and come into force on a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council.

*Order in council*

**(4)** Subsection (2) and sections and come into force on a day to be fixed by order of the Governor in Council.
